m 1024-OQU
United States Department of the Interior
National Park
National Register off Historic Places 
Inventory — Nomination Form
Continuation ahtrt ttam number 8 P*9«
bag, and laid on the top; each determined to be 
the first off for the mines....All were looking to 
the glorious future with a faith that could have 
moved mountains, particularly if they were 
suspected of having gold concealed underneath [8].
Niantic arrived at San Francisco on July 4, 1849. Her voyage was 
perhaps one of the best recorded; at least four passengers left 
published reminiscences of their trip, another left a manuscript 
diary, and the ship's log has survived [9],
Niantic's log records a steady stream of desertions by the crew; 
on July 12 the last entry in the log records Niantic's being 
stripped by her remaining crew. The crew gone to the mines, and 
Capt. Cleaveland unable to raise another, Niantic was offered for 
sale in August 1849. The purchasers did not take her to sea, 
though. Merchants Samuel Ward, Charles Mersch, Adolphe Milord, 
and Elbert P. Jones bought the ship for the purpose of converting 
her into a storeship [10]. A shortage of buildings and timber, 
high costs for construction, and a readily (and inexpensively) 
available fleet of near-abandoned vessels made storeship 
conversions a lucrative venture. Niantic was the first to be 
hauled in close to shore and converted; early lithographs of the 
San Francisco waterfront show her in her unique position. She 
was soon joined; by 1851 more than 150 storeships were hemmed by 
development on the waterfront or rode at anchor off the city's 
wharves.
Niantic stored a variety of goods in her hold and a variety of 
businesses occupied the "barn" built on her deck. From the late 
summer of 1849 to the spring of 1851 Niantic served the 
mercantile and business community of rapidly growing San 
Francisco. Dozens of vessels arrived daily, disgorging 
passengers and freight. Miners who could not take all of their 
belongings to the mines left their trunks and other baggage in 
Niantic and other storeships; merchandise was also kept in the 
ship until ready for sale. The vessel occasioned comment by many 
visitors to the Gold Rush city and many published accounts 
mention Niantic . Gradually the vessel became land-locked as 
piers and wharves stretched out across the shallow waters of 
Yerba Buena Cove, San Francisco's waterfront. By early 1851 
Niantic was described by one author as "High and Dry":
The front of the city is extending rapidly into the 
sea, as water-lots are filled up with sand...This