JniUd Statts Department of the Interior
National Park
National Register of Historic Places 
Inventory—Nomination Form
Continuation stwtt (torn number 7
The "barn" which enclosed Nlantic's decks curved to follow the 
lines of the ship's bow and stepped up at the quarter deck to 
create another story on the structure. A series of structures 
surrounded Niantic, including a small pumphouse on her starboard 
stern quarter and a small office building on the Clay street 
wharf (which ran along the ship's port side) adjacent to 
Niantic's midships. The Niantic Storeship remained in business 
until destroyed by fire on May 4, 1851.
Pre-1978 Intrusions at the Niantic Site
The fire of 1851 burned the storeship Niantic to her waterline, 
just at the turn of the bilge. Her cargo of unburned merchandise 
was covered by collapsing burnt debris and, in 1851, the entire 
hull buried under a layer of sand to allow for the construction 
of a building on the site. When portions of Niantic's remains 
were uncovered in 1978, sixteen feet of fill lay atop her hull. 
While details are not available, it is estimated that 70 to 75 
feet of the stern and midships portions of the Niantic were 
excavated during the 1872 and 1906 (7?) work. The construction 
work in 1978 uncovered 90 feet, including an additional 15 feet 
of her hull never before uncovered.
1978 Exposure and Removal of Niantic Remains
On May 11, 1978, work began to remove the exposed portion of 
Niantic's hull from the still-buried intact forward section of 
the ship which lay beneath the adjacent lot to the west. 
Jackhammers, saws, and axes were employed to sever an 8-foot wide 
cross section of her hull at the midships and stern. The section 
was lifted out and, along with Niantic's rudder, log windlass, 
large beams, and copper sheathing, was deposited at the San 
Francisco Maritime Museum. These structural remains, along with 
several thousand recovered artifacts, were accessioned into the 
collections of the National Park Service. [3]
The remains of Niantic were again exposed in late April 1978 [4] 
as construction activity commenced. Approximately 90 feet of the 
vessel's hull was exposed from the stern to a point aft of the 
bow, extended beneath a concrete bulkhead and into an adjacent 
undeveloped lot. The exposed remains were slated for demolition 
to allow the construction work to continue, so an arrangement was 
made with the San Francisco Maritime Museum for a "rapid rescue 
dig" to recover an intact assemblage of artifacts located in the
SEE CONTINUATION SHEET